---
layout: post
category :
tagline: ""
tags :
title: "How to Find a Startup: The Startup Ecosystem, The Innovation Community, and
Network Effects"
description: Utilizing Techscene to map the startup ecosystem
author: greenfield
image: /assets/images/ts-exp/startup_ecosystem.png
---
{% include JB/setup %}

When the TechScene map first launched, its goal was to highlight the incredible
growth, economic potential, and positive impact to the city of Boston’s startup
ecosystem. From modest beginnings, the app has grown to now list over [1,600
startups](http://techscene.at/boston), representing over $38.5 billion in funds
raised and over 74,000 jobs created - numbers of which any city would be eager
to boast! (Are you associated with a startup and not on the map? [Drop us a
line](http://greenfieldhq.com/#contact), we’ll add you!)


![startup ecosystem]({{ BASE_PATH }}/assets/images/ts-exp/startup_ecosystem.png)

As is often the case, having created a resource and put it out into the world
for consumption, we’ve been thrilled and amazed at the life the technology has
taken on. Now, it’s possible to get a view into the startup ecosystems of some
of the most technologically advanced, entrepreneur-friendly cities in the
country. What’s more, we’ve started to hear from companies about deals and
partnerships forged thanks to this simplest of discovery mechanisms.

All of this raises one question.

## How do we get from points on a map to a thriving innovation community?

Early on, it was enough simply to quantify the scope of growth in Boston’s
startup scene. But from those early days, follow-on questions were quick to come
to mind. What is the economic impact of Boston’s plethora of new tech startups?
Are they creating jobs? Are they helping the city attract outside investment? Is
Boston’s startup ecosystem presenting or obscuring lessons that might benefit
other cities?

For years, there’s been a theory that Boston suffers a brain drain. Despite the
metro area’s density of world-class universities and colleges, many founders and
talent moved to the supposedly more robust ecosystems of Silicon Valley and New
York City. Even if once true, the state of the map today would hardly support
such reasoning. It’s hard to look at this and not see a thriving innovation
community.

![innovation community]({{ BASE_PATH }}/assets/images/ts-exp/innovation_community.png)

There are two sides to this coin - the venture capitalists and angel investors,
who might be more attracted to companies founded in a particular city as they
become more familiar with the available supply of talent; and, startups
themselves, especially as they pivot, increase their headcount, or expand their
service and technology offerings.

## How venture capitalists benefit from a healthy startup ecosystem

Technological growth has decreased the distance between potential business
partners. It’s easier than ever to arrange virtual meetings, and effective
communication doesn’t *really* require being in the same room - not in a world
with Skype, Google Hangouts, and a host of advanced video tele-conferencing
providers.

Telepresence technologies are so popular for the very same reason that VCs are
among the biggest beneficiaries of the healthy startup ecosystems that
[now](http://techscene.at/nyc) [dot](http://techscene.at/seattle)
[the](http://techscene.at/chicago) [map](http://techscene.at/austin). As both a
discovery mechanism and research tool, the Techscene startup map makes it easier
than ever to find and communicate with young companies primed for growth.

The idea of traveling from San Francisco to Austin for a single meeting might be
difficult to justify. Being able to identify handfuls of intriguing startups
with which to meet, however, means that VCs the world over will be that much
more likely to schedule in-person meetings with multiple companies in the same
city, on a single trip.

Not only that, but for many venture capital arms, it’s increasingly likely that
they will assume a role that shares many traits more traditionally associated
with business incubators and startup accelerators. This is particularly the case
when it is necessary to pair founders with a [technology
team](http://blog.greenfieldhq.com/2014/08/04/source-control/), and when asked
to assist portfolio companies as they grow and increase headcount. In fostering
the growth of and engaging with a city’s startup community, VCs are better able
to quickly connect with relevant expertise as needed.

## How your startup benefits from the network effect of an innovation community

Growing companies have needs across the spectrum. Incorporation into existing
founder networks is a powerful solution to many such hurdles, but still leaves
the question of how to gain access to those networks in the first place. Tools
that aid the investment community in their discovery of promising ventures, such
as the TechScene map, can help startups gain initial traction. As Matt Hurley,
co-founder of the business accelerator [Dat
Venture](http://www.datventure.com/), notes:

"Boston's extensive startup network helps our international entrepreneurs find
mentors to chat over coffee with, identify investors to pitch their companies
to, and discover new customers and partners. Gaining exposure to this ecosystem
is a critical task for growth-stage companies that have good traction overseas
but need to expand into the US market in order to secure their next round of
funding and internationalize their companies."

There’s good news and there’s bad news to go along with that fact. It’s always
better to end on a high note, so we’ll tackle the bad news first.

The bad news is, there now are so many tools available to accomplish any single
goal that it can require expert advice just to decide on a CMS for your website,
or a CRM for your sales team. And that says nothing about the plethora of
languages and frameworks with which web developers might have to engage on a
given project. Diversity of choice may be a social good, but it’s a headache
from a business operations perspective.

The good news is that, with the explosion in the number of tools there has been
a proportionate increase in experts available. Being part of a thriving
innovation community means easy access to the expertise of companies, like
yours, that just want to build cool things and help their clients realize their
business goals.

Whether it’s finding a well-regarded Elasticsearch developer to better integrate
search functionality in your application, identifying a full-service ember.js
development team to serve as your technological partners on a new venture, or
[recruiting a new hire](http://blog.greenfieldhq.com/2015/03/25/warning-signs/)
that addresses real issues in your current organization, the broader and deeper
startup communities being fostered across the country are making it easier than
ever before for businesses at all stages of growth to identify and address their
needs.

To learn more about how Greenfield can help you build a stunning web app from
your data, [contact us today](http://greenfieldhq.com/#contact). And make sure
you know about our new content as we post it by subscribing to our blog here.
